Best practices / do-dont-consider article (#5036)
Particular/docs.particular.net: nservicebus/best-practices.md

As a dependency, conventional wisdom holds that the NServiceBus API should itself be abstracted behind another abstraction, perhaps as a hedge against a possible future where the system will have to completely switch to a different service bus library.

However, NServiceBus is a fairly opinionated framework that attempts to guide developers building distributed systems into a [pit of success](https://blog.codinghorror.com/falling-into-the-pit-of-success/). It also becomes the communication foundation for the entire system.

Because of these qualities, abstractions over NServiceBus tend to basically mimic the NServiceBus API which add no value. When it comes time to switch to a different service bus framework (which is a dreadfully uncommon activity to start with as it does not deliver any business value) it ends up being much more difficult than simply swapping one implementation for a new one.

Meanwhile, a custom abstraction makes this NServiceBus documentation fairly useless as developers must code to a custom, often undocumented API instead of directly against the NServiceBus API.

> :x: **DO NOT use NServiceBus to query data**

Reviewer: You might want to review this one

Reviewer: Oh, crap, you already wrote something about this at the bottom. Delete it if you will.

:x: **DO NOT use messaging for [data distribution](/nservicebus/messaging/data-distribution.md)**

A common example of a data distribution scenario is having cached data on multiple scaled-out web servers and attempting to deliver a message to each of them. The message indicates each server should drop their current cache entries and retrieve fresh data from the database.

Asynchronous messaging (e.g. NServiceBus) is **not** a good solution for data distribution scenarios. Other technologies that are designed specifically to solve these problems should be used instead. Some examples can be found in the [recommendations section](/nservicebus/messaging/data-distribution.md#recommendations) of the data distribution article.

## Message endpoints

:heavy_check_mark: **DO keep message handlers focused on business code**

Message handlers should be fairly simple, and focused on only the business code needed to handle the message. Infrastructure code for logging, exception management, timing, auditing, authorization, unit of work, message signing/encryption (the list could go on forever) should not be included in a message handler.

> Instead, implement this functionality separately in a [message pipeline behavior](/nservicebus/pipeline/manipulate-with-behaviors.md), which enables inserting additional functionality into the NServiceBus message processing pipeline, kind of like an [ASP.NET ActionFilter except for messaging.

Reviewer: Why the `[ASP.NET` ? Where you thinking of including a link or something?

For a high-level overview of infrastructure concerns and behaviors, see the blog post [Infrastructure soup](https://particular.net/blog/infrastructure-soup).

:x: **DO NOT catch exceptions in a message handler**

> NServiceBus relies on a message handler completing _without_ throwing an exception to know that the message was processed successfully. If an exception is thrown, the message can be retried until it succeeds, which resolves many transient errors. (See the blog post [I caught an exception. Now what?](https://particular.net/blog/but-all-my-errors-are-severe).) If too many retries occur, the message is moved to an error queue where a developer can figure out what's wrong with it and correct the underlying issue.

Reviewer: Maybe mention ServicePulse here?

> If exceptions are caught in a message handler, the message will be consumed, without the ability to be retried, regardless of the error.

Reviewer: This doesn't read well?
- What does it mean 'caught'? Maybe mention "swallowed" as they basically disappear?
- What does it mean messages are consumed? Maybe mention "removed from the queue" or something?

In production scenarios, different permissions are needed to administer resources such as database tables and queues, and the endpoint should not run in production with permissions to alter these resources.

In production, the creation of queues, database tables, and other tables should be scripted as a part of a DevOps process when the endpoint is installed. Methods to administer these resources differ for every message transport and persistence package. For many packages, Particular will provide a `dotnet` global tool, PowerShell library, or other means of performing operational scripting to create endpoints.

:heavy_check_mark: **DO use the [Outbox feature](/nservicebus/outbox/) to provide consistency between business data modifications and messaging operations**

Because message queues generally do not support any form of transactions, message handlers that modify business data in a database run into problems when the messages that are sent become inconsistent with the changes made to business data, resulting in ghost messages or phantom records.

> Using the Outbox guarantees exactly-once message processing by piggybacking on the local database transaction used to store business data.

Reviewer: Not sure if I'd use 'piggybacking'. I'm not sure I even knew what that word meant, until I met you! :)

Message queues are long-lasting and durable. Occasionally-connected clients, such as mobile devices or client-side graphical user interfaces, should not receive messages from message queues. The durable nature of message queuing can result in a backlog of messages for a disconnected client which, if disconnected long enough, can result in queue quotas being exceeded. This can ultimately impact performance in other parts of the system.

For occasionally-connected clients, consider another communication medium, such as in the [Near real-time transient clients sample](/samples/near-realtime-clients/) which communicates with clients using [SignalR](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/apps/aspnet/signalr).

## System monitoring

:heavy_check_mark: **DO install the [Heartbeats plugin](/monitoring/heartbeats/) in all endpoints to monitor for endpoint health**

The Heartbeats plugin sends a message to [ServiceControl](/servicecontrol/) at regular intervals to demonstrate that the process is not only executing (which would be provided by any suite of system monitoring tools) but is also capable of interacting with the message transport.

> If ServiceControl stops receiving heartbeat messages from an endpoint, that endpoint will be shown as [inactive in ServicePulse](/monitoring/heartbeats/in-servicepulse.md). In addition, ServiceControl will publish a [`H`eartbeatStopped` event](/monitoring/heartbeats/notification-events.md) so that operations staff can be notified and respond.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If ServiceControl stops receiving heartbeat messages from an endpoint, that endpoint will be shown as [inactive in ServicePulse](/monitoring/heartbeats/in-servicepulse.md). In addition, ServiceControl will publish a [`HeartbeatStopped` event](/monitoring/heartbeats/notification-events.md) so that operations staff can be notified and respond.
```

---
title: Best practices
summary: An assortment of best practices presented as DO, DO NOT, and CONSIDER.
reviewed: 2020-10-01
---

This article will present recommendations to keep in mind when designing a system using NServiceBus.

## Architecture

> :heavy_check_mark: **DO split up endpoints before scaling out**

Reviewer: You might want to review this one

Multiple message handlers can be combined inside a single logical endpoint. These handlers all share a single queue for different types of messages. This can decrease throughput of messages.

Instead of scaling out endpoints over different hosts (virtual machines, docker containers, etc), it's better to split up handlers over different logical endpoints. The comparison can also be made to a monolith, which is harder to maintain, update and deploy than smaller services/endpoints. Every logical endpoint can adhere to the Single Responsibility Principle and be responsible for certain types of message handlers. Like `Finance.Invoicing` and `Finance.Orders` and `Finance.Pricing`.

> :heavy_check_mark: **DO split up endpoints to separate message processing**

Reviewer: You might want to review this one
